<html>
Jan. 26, 2015
<br><br>
<p><strong>Capstone Project Proposal for Ada Developer's Academy</strong><br>
<strong>Brenda Praggastis & Linnea Damer</strong></p>

<p><strong>Tracking Disease in Africa</strong></p>

<p><strong>Summary:</strong><br>
The purpose of this capstone project is to assist in the development of a prototype web based service and application for PNNL.  The purpose of this prototype is to collect and organize disparate datasets retrieved from various organizations monitoring the spread of disease in Africa.  The user interface will provide analysis of current conditions through visual and numeric representations including advanced querying features.  The web application will allow for differing levels of access based on use: analysis, research, and public information.</p>

<p><strong>Background:</strong> <br>
Organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) offer publicly available repositories of bioinformatics data collected annually. The WHO website offers excellent visual and numeric representations of their annual reports which make it possible to study historical trends.  HealthMap also offers excellent data representations with more frequent updates gathering its data from WHO and other organizations such as ProMed, which collects informal reports of infectious diseases through a social media framework.  According to the Online Journal of Public Health Informatics (v.5(1) 2013),  there is growing  demand for rapid access to all relevant data sources documenting the spread of infectious diseases. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3692935/]  The Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) creates quarterly funding calls for a user-friendly customizable service, which provides access to current data and customizable research tools for data analysis. [http://www.dtra.mil/docs/trac/bsve-fact-sheet<em>draft</em>05-01-2014_pa-cleared-distro-statement.pdf?sfvrsn=0] Any such service should also provide a communications forum to facilitate research and analysis.</p>

<p><strong>Proposal:</strong><br>
As a capstone project we propose to create a source specific API which will parse data in a proprietary form, and return it as JSON according to a standard given by PNNL using schema.rdfs.org data types.  We propose to create a Rails application using PostgreSQL that accepts data in JSON form and stores it in a relational database with relations aligned to schema.rdfs.org.  The user interface will be a subscription based website with tiers of user accounts and functionality. Tiers will include: administrative, research, and public. Users on the research tier will have verified credentials and will have access to all data, public users will have limited access to data with the option of creating saved queries. Features of the site will permit filtered data retrieval and visualization as well as a discussion forum with tagging so that research groups studying similar data sets can easily collaborate.  This is a four-week project so emphasis will be on a prototype composed of functional milestones.  The project will be broken into the following pieces:</p>

<ol>
<li> Development of a robust set of types and relations defined by Schema.org to use for all models in the project.</li>
<li> Development of a parsing API for 3 different input streams.  Datasets will be dynamically generated by PNNL in 3 different format streams, and will involve matching values in the dataset to types.</li>
<li> Development of the Rails application that will draw data from an API, including separate accounts for analysts and the general public.</li>
<li> Front End work creating a basic webpage with queries and data displays as well as a forum with tags.</li>
<li> Refinement of Front End using APIs for graphical displays, dashboard utilities, maps, etc.</li>
</ol>




</html>
